#title Bivariate & Multivariate Graphs with Plotly Express

** Introduction

In this lesson, you’ll learn how to create bivariate and multivariate
graphs using Plotly Express. These types of graphs are essential for
exploring relationships between two or more variables, whether they are
quantitative or categorical. Understanding these relationships can
provide deeper insights into your data.

Let’s dive in!

** Learning Objectives

By the end of this lesson, you will be able to:

 - Create scatter plots for quantitative vs. quantitative data
 - Generate grouped histograms and violin plots for quantitative
   vs. categorical data
 - Create grouped, stacked, and percent-stacked bar charts for
   categorical vs. categorical data
 - Visualize time series data using bar charts and line charts
 - Create bubble charts to display relationships between three or more
   variables
 - Use faceting to compare distributions across subsets of data

** Imports

This lesson requires =plotly.express=, =pandas=, =numpy=, and
=vega_datasets=. Install them if you haven’t already.

<example>
import plotly.express as px
import pandas as pd
import numpy as np
from vega_datasets import data
</example>

** Numeric vs. Numeric Data

When both variables are quantitative, scatter plots are an excellent way
to visualize their relationship.

*** Scatter Plot

Let’s create a scatter plot to examine the relationship between
=total_bill= and =tip= in the tips dataset. The tips dataset is included
in Plotly Express and contains information about restaurant bills and
tips that were collected by a waiter in a US restaurant.

First, we’ll load the dataset and view the first five rows:

<example>
tips = px.data.tips()
tips
</example>

Next, we’ll create a basic scatter plot. We do this with the
=px.scatter= function.

<example>
px.scatter(tips, x='total_bill', y='tip')
</example>

From the scatter plot, we can observe that as the total bill increases,
the tip amount tends to increase as well.

Let’s enhance the scatter plot by adding labels and a title.

<example>
px.scatter(
    tips,
    x="total_bill",
    y="tip",
    labels={"total_bill": "Total Bill ($)", "tip": "Tip ($)"},
    title="Relationship Between Total Bill and Tip Amount",
)
</example>

Recall that you can see additional information about the function by
typing =px.scatter?= in a cell and executing the cell.

<example>
px.scatter?
</example>

*** Practice Q: Life Expectancy vs. GDP Per Capita

<quote>
**Practice**

Using the Gapminder dataset (the 2007 subset, =g_2007=, defined below),
create a scatter plot showing the relationship between =gdpPercap= (GDP
per capita) and =lifeExp= (life expectancy).

According to the plot, what is the relationship between GDP per capita
and life expectancy?

<example>
gapminder = px.data.gapminder()
g_2007 = gapminder.query('year == 2007')
g_2007.head()
# Your code here
</example>

According to the plot, there is a positive relationship between GDP per
capita and life expectancy, though it appears to level off at higher GDP
values.
</quote>

** Numeric vs. Categorical Data

When one variable is quantitative and the other is categorical, we can
use grouped histograms, violin plots, or box plots to visualize the
distribution of the quantitative variable across different categories.

*** Grouped Histograms

First, here’s how you can create a regular histogram of all tips:

<example>
px.histogram(tips, x='tip')
</example>

To create a grouped histogram, use the =color= parameter to specify the
categorical variable. Here, we’ll color the histogram by =sex=:

<example>
px.histogram(tips, x='tip', color='sex')
</example>

By default, the histograms for each category are stacked. To change this
behavior, you can use the =barmode= parameter. For example,
<code>barmode='overlay'</code> will create an overlaid histogram:

<example>
px.histogram(tips, x="tip", color="sex", barmode="overlay")
</example>

This creates two semi-transparent histograms overlaid on top of each
other, allowing for direct comparison of the distributions.

*** Practice Q: Age Distribution by Gender

<quote>
**Practice**

Using the =la_riots= dataset from =vega_datasets=, create a grouped
histogram of =age= by =gender=. Compare the age distributions between
different genders.

According to the plot, was the oldest victim male or female?

<example>
la_riots = data.la_riots()
la_riots.head()
# Your code here
</example>

According to the plot, the oldest victim was female.
</quote>

*** Violin & Box Plots

Violin plots are useful for comparing the distribution of a quantitative
variable across different categories. They show the probability density
of the data at different values and can include a box plot to summarize
key statistics.

First, let’s create a violin plot of all tips:

<example>
px.violin(tips, y="tip")
</example>

We can add a box plot to the violin plot by setting the =box= parameter
to =True=:

<example>
px.violin(tips, y="tip", box=True)
</example>

For just the box plot, we can use =px.box=:

<example>
px.box(tips, y="tip")
</example>

To add jitter points to the violin or box plots, we can use the
<code>points = 'all'</code> parameter.

<example>
px.violin(tips, y="tip", points="all")
</example>

Now, to create a violin plot of tips by gender, use the =x= parameter to
specify the categorical variable:

<example>
px.violin(tips, y="tip", x="sex", box=True)
</example>

We can also add a color axis to differentiate the violins:

<example>
px.violin(tips, y="tip", x="sex", color="sex", box=True)
</example>

<quote>
**Practice**

*** Practice Q: Life Expectancy by Continent

Using the =g_2007= dataset, create a violin plot showing the
distribution of =lifeExp= by =continent=.

According to the plot, which continent has the highest median country
life expectancy?

<example>
g_2007 = gapminder.query("year == 2007")
g_2007.head()
# Your code here
</example>

According to the plot, Oceania has the highest median country life
expectancy.
</quote>

*** Summary Bar Charts (Mean and Standard Deviation)

Sometimes it’s useful to display the mean and standard deviation of a
quantitative variable across different categories. This can be
visualized using a bar chart with error bars.

First, let’s calculate the mean and standard deviation of tips for each
gender. You have not yet learned how to do this, but you will in a later
lesson.

<example>
# Calculate the mean and standard deviation
summary_df = (
    tips.groupby("sex")
    .agg(mean_tip=("tip", "mean"), std_tip=("tip", "std"))
    .reset_index()
)
summary_df
</example>

Next, we’ll create a bar chart using =px.bar= and add error bars using
the =error_y= parameter:

<example>
# Create the bar chart
px.bar(summary_df, x="sex", y="mean_tip", error_y="std_tip")
</example>

This bar chart displays the average tip amount for each gender, with
error bars representing the standard deviation.

<quote>
**Practice**

*** Practice Q: Average Total Bill by Day

Using the =tips= dataset, create a bar chart of mean =total_bill= by
=day= with standard deviation error bars. You should copy and paste the
code from the example above and modify it to create this plot.

According to the plot, which day has the highest average total bill?

<example>
tips.head()  # View the tips dataset
# Your code here
</example>

According to the plot, Sunday has the highest average bill.
</quote>

<quote>
**Side Note: Difference between =px.bar= and =px.histogram=**

Notice that this is the first time we are using the =px.bar= function.
For past plots, we have used =px.histogram= to make bar charts.

The bar chart function generally expects that the numeric variable being
plotted is already in it’s own column, while the histogram function does
the grouping for you.

For example, in the cell below, we use =px.histogram= to make a bar
chart of the =sex= column. The resulting plot compares the number of
male and female customers in the dataset.

<example>
px.histogram(tips, x='sex')
</example>

To make the same plot using =px.bar=, we first need to group by the
=sex= column and count the number of rows for each sex.

<example>
sex_counts = tips['sex'].value_counts().reset_index()
sex_counts
</example>

We can then plot the =day= column using =px.bar=:

<example>
px.bar(sex_counts, x="sex", y="count")
</example>

This produces a bar chart with one bar for each sex.
</quote>

** Categorical vs. Categorical Data

When both variables are categorical, bar charts with a color axis are
effective for visualizing the frequency distribution across categories.
We will focus on three types of bar charts: stacked bar charts,
percent-stacked bar charts, and grouped/clustered bar charts.

*** Stacked Bar Charts

Stacked bar charts show the total counts and the breakdown within each
category. To make a stacked bar chart, use the =color= parameter to
specify the categorical variable:

<example>
px.histogram(
    tips,
    x='day',
    color='sex'
)
</example>

Let’s add numbers to the bars to show the exact counts, and also improve
the color palette with custom colors.

<example>
px.histogram(
    tips,
    x="day",
    color="sex",
    text_auto=True,
    color_discrete_sequence=["#deb221", "#2f828a"],
)
</example>

This stacked bar chart shows the total number of customers each day,
broken down by gender.

<quote>
**Practice**

*** Practice Q: High and Low Income Countries by Continent

Using the =g_2007_income= dataset, create a stacked bar chart showing
the count of high and low income countries in each continent.

<example>
gap_dat = px.data.gapminder()

g_2007_income = (
    gap_dat.query("year == 2007")
    .drop(columns=["year", "iso_alpha", "iso_num"])
    .assign(
        income_group=lambda df: np.where(
            df.gdpPercap > 15000, "High Income", "Low & Middle Income"
        )
    )
)

g_2007_income.head()
# Your code here
</example>
</quote>

*** Percent-Stacked Bar Charts

To show proportions instead of counts, we can create percent-stacked bar
charts by setting the =barnorm= parameter to ='percent'=:

<example>
# Create the percent-stacked bar chart
px.histogram(tips, x="day", color="sex", barnorm="percent")
</example>

This chart normalizes the bar heights to represent percentages, showing
the proportion of each gender for each day.

We can also add text labels to the bars to show the exact percentages:

<example>
px.histogram(tips, x="day", color="sex", barnorm="percent", text_auto=".1f")
</example>

The symbol =.1f= in the =text_auto= parameter formats the text labels to
one decimal place.

<quote>
**Practice**

*** Practice Q: Proportion of High and Low Income Countries by Continent

Again using the =g_2007_income= dataset, create a percent-stacked bar
chart showing the proportion of high and low income countries in each
continent. Add text labels to the bars to show the exact percentages.

According the plot, which continent has the highest proportion of high
income countries? Are there any limitations to this plot?

<example>
# Your code here
</example>
</quote>

*** Clustered Bar Charts

For clustered bar charts, set the =barmode= parameter to ='group'= to
place the bars for each category side by side:

<example>
px.histogram(tips, x="day", color="sex", barmode="group")
</example>

This layout makes it easier to compare values across categories
directly.

** Time Series Data

Time series data represents observations collected at different points
in time. It’s crucial for analyzing trends, patterns, and changes over
time. Let’s explore some basic time series visualizations using
Nigeria’s population data from the Gapminder dataset.

First, let’s prepare our data:

<example>
# Load the Gapminder dataset
gapminder = px.data.gapminder()

# Subset the data for Nigeria
nigeria_pop = gapminder.query('country == "Nigeria"')[['year', 'pop']]
nigeria_pop
</example>

*** Bar Chart

A bar chart can be used to plot time series data.

<example>
# Bar chart
px.bar(nigeria_pop, x="year", y="pop")
</example>

This bar chart gives us a clear view of how Nigeria’s population has
changed over the years, with each bar representing the population at a
specific year.

*** Line Chart

A line chart is excellent for showing continuous changes over time:

<example>
# Line chart
px.line(nigeria_pop, x="year", y="pop")
</example>

The line chart connects the population values, making it easier to see
the overall trend of population growth.

Adding markers to a line chart can highlight specific data points:

<example>
# Line chart with points
px.line(nigeria_pop, x='year', y='pop', markers=True)
</example>

We can also compare the population growth of multiple countries by
adding a =color= parameter:

<example>
nigeria_ghana = gapminder.query('country in ["Nigeria", "Ghana"]')
px.line(nigeria_ghana, x="year", y="pop", color="country", markers=True)
</example>

This chart allows us to compare the population trends of Nigeria and
Ghana over time.

<quote>
**Practice**

*** Practice Q: GDP per Capita Time Series

Using the Gapminder dataset, create a time series visualization for the
GDP per capita of Iraq.

<example>
# Your code here
</example>

What happened to Iraq in the 1980s that might explain the graph shown?
</quote>

** Plots with three or more variables

Although bivariate visualizations are the most common types of
visualizations, plots with three or more variables are also sometimes
useful. Let’s explore a few examples.

*** Bubble Charts

Bubble charts show the relationship between three variables by mapping
the size of the points to a third variable. Below, we plot the
relationship between =gdpPercap= and =lifeExp= with the size of the
points representing the population of the country.

<example>
px.scatter(g_2007, x="gdpPercap", y="lifeExp", size="pop")
</example>

We can easily spot the largest countries by population, such as China,
India, and the United States. We can also add a color axis to
differentiate between continents:

<example>
px.scatter(g_2007, x="gdpPercap", y="lifeExp", size="pop", color="continent")
</example>

Now we have four different variables being plotted:

 - =gdpPercap= on the x-axis
 - =lifeExp= on the y-axis
 - =pop= as the size of the points
 - =continent= as the color of the points

<quote>
**Practice**

*** Practice Q: Tips Bubble Chart

Using the =tips= dataset, create a bubble chart showing the relationship
between =total_bill= and =tip= with the size of the points representing
the =size= of the party, and the color representing the =day= of the
week.

Use the plot to answer the question:

 - The highest two tip amounts were on which days and what was the table
   size?

<example>
tips.head()
# Your code here
</example>

According to the plot, the highest two tips were both on Saturday, from
parties of 3 and 4 people.
</quote>

*** Facet Plots

Faceting splits a single plot into multiple plots, with each plot
showing a different subset of the data. This is useful for comparing
distributions across subsets.

For example, we can facet the bubble chart by continent:

<example>
px.scatter(
    g_2007,
    x="gdpPercap",
    y="lifeExp",
    size="pop",
    color="continent",
    facet_col="continent",
)
</example>

We can change the arrangement of the facets by changing the
=facet_col_wrap= parameter. For example, <code>facet_col_wrap=2</code>
will wrap the facets into two columns:

<example>
px.scatter(
    g_2007,
    x="gdpPercap",
    y="lifeExp",
    size="pop",
    color="continent",
    facet_col="continent",
    facet_col_wrap=2,
)
</example>

Similarly, we can facet the violin plots of tips by day of the week:

<example>
px.violin(
    tips,
    x="sex",
    y="tip",
    color="sex",
    facet_col="day",
    facet_col_wrap=2,
)
</example>

Faceting allows us to compare distributions across different days,
providing more granular insights.

<quote>
**Practice**

*** Practice Q: Tips Facet Plot

Using the =tips= dataset, create a percent-stacked bar chart of the
=time= column, colored by the =sex= column, and facetted by the =day=
column.

Which day-time has the highest proportion of male customers (e.g. Friday
Lunch, Saturday Dinner, etc.)?

<example>
tips.head()
# Your code here
</example>

According to the plot, Saturday lunch has the highest proportion of male
customers.
</quote>

** Summary

In this lesson, you learned how to create bivariate and multivariate
graphs using Plotly Express. Understanding these visualization
techniques will help you explore and communicate relationships in your
data more effectively.

See you in the next lesson!
