#title Functions, Methods, and Libraries in Python

[[https://youtu.be/bGmceVFYI-g?si=qPmObA5dzdDzCh1E]]

** Learning objectives

 1. You understand what functions and methods are in Python.
 2. You can identify and use arguments (parameters) in functions and
    methods.
 3. You know how to call built-in functions and methods on objects.
 4. You understand what libraries are in Python and how to import them.
 5. You know how to install a simple external library and use it in your
    code.

** Introduction

In this lesson, you will learn about functions, methods, and libraries
in Python, building on the basics we covered in the previous lesson.

To get started, open your preferred Python environment (e.g., Jupyter
Notebook, VS Code, or PyCharm), and create a new Python file or
notebook.

Next, **save the file** with a name like “functions_and_libraries.py” or
“functions_and_libraries.ipynb” depending on your environment.

You should now type all the code from this lesson into that file.

** Functions

A function is a block of code that performs a specific task. It can take
inputs (arguments) and return outputs. Here’s an example of a built-in
function with just one argument:

<example>
# Using the len() function to get the length of a string
len("Python")
</example>

The =round()= function takes two arguments: the number to round and the
number of decimal places to round to.

<example>
# Using the round() function to round a number
round(3.1415, 2)
</example>

<quote>
**Practice**

*** Q: Using built-in functions

Use the =abs()= function to get the absolute value of -5.

Write your code below and run it to check your answer:

<example>
# Your code here
</example>
</quote>

** Arguments (Parameters)

Arguments (also called parameters) are the values that you pass to a
function (or method) when you call it.

There are different ways to pass arguments to a function.

Consider again the =round()= function.

If we look at the documentation for the =round()= function, with :

<example>
round?
</example>

We see that it takes two arguments:

 - =number=: The number to round.
 - =ndigits=: The number of decimal places to round to.

There are two main ways to pass arguments to this function.

 1. Positional arguments: Passed in the order they are defined. Since
    the default order of the arguments is =number= then =ndigits=, we
    can pass the arguments in that order without specifying the argument
    names, as we did above.

<example>
round(3.1415, 2)
</example>

If we swap the order of the arguments, we get an error:

<example>
round(2, 3.1415)
</example>

 2. Keyword arguments: Passed by specifying the argument name followed
    by a <code>=</code> and the argument value.

<example>
round(number=3.1415, ndigits=2)
</example>

With this method, we can pass the arguments in any order, as long as we
use the argument names.

<example>
round(ndigits=2, number=3.1415)
</example>

Specifying the keyword is usually recommended, except for simple
functions with very few arguments, or when the order of the arguments is
obvious from context.

<quote>
**Practice**

*** Q: Using Positional Arguments with =pow()=

Use the =pow()= function to calculate 2 raised to the power of 7 by
passing positional arguments. You may need to consult the documentation
for the =pow()= function to see how it works.

Write your code below and run it to check your answer:

<example>
# Your code here
</example>

*** Q: Using Keyword Arguments with =round()=

Use the =round()= function to round the number =9.87652= to =3= decimal
places by specifying keyword arguments.

Write your code below and run it to check your answer:

<example>
# Your code here
</example>
</quote>

** Methods

Methods are similar to functions, but they are associated with specific
objects or data types. They are called using dot notation.

For example, every string object comes with a range of built-in methods,
like =upper()= to convert to uppercase, =lower()= to convert to
lowercase, =replace()= to replace substrings, and many more.

Let’s see how to use these:

<example>
name = "python"
print(name.upper())
print(name.lower())
print(name.replace("p", "🐍"))
</example>

We can also call the methods directly on the string object, without
assigning it to a variable:

<example>
# Using the upper() method on a string
print("python".upper())
print("PYTHON".lower())
print("python".replace("p", "🐍"))
</example>

Similarly, numbers in Python come with some built-in methods. For
example, the =as_integer_ratio()= (added in Python 3.8) method converts
a decimalnumber to a ratio of two integers.

<example>
# Using the as_integer_ratio() method on a float
example_decimal = 1.5
example_decimal.as_integer_ratio()
</example>

<quote>
**Practice**

*** Q: Definitions

Come up with simple definitions for the following terms that are clear
to YOU (even if not technically exactly accurate):

 - Function
 - Method
 - Argument (Parameter)
 - Dot Notation
</quote>

<quote>
**Practice**

*** Q: Using methods

 1. Call the =replace()= method on the string “Helo” to replace the
    single l with double l.
 2. Call the =split()= method on the string “Hello World” to split the
    string into a list of words.

<example>
# Your code here
</example>
</quote>

** Libraries in Python

Libraries are collections of pre-written code that you can use in your
programs. They extend the functionality of Python by providing
additional functions and tools.

For example, the =math= library provides mathematical functions like
=sqrt()= for square roots and =sin()= for sine.

If we try to use the =sqrt()= function without importing the =math=
library, we get an error:

<example>
# This will cause a NameError
sqrt(16)
</example>

We can import the =math= library and use the =sqrt()= function like
this:

<example>
# Import the library
import math
</example>

Then we can use the =sqrt()= function like this:

<example>
# Use the sqrt() function
math.sqrt(16)
</example>

We can get help on a function in a similar way, calling both the
function and the library it’s in:

<example>
# Get help on the sqrt() function
math.sqrt?
</example>

We can also import libraries with aliases. For example, we can import
the =math= library with the alias =m=:

<example>
# Import the entire library with an alias
import math as m
# Then we can use the alias to call the function
m.sqrt(16)
</example>

Finally, if you want to skip the alias/library name, you can either
import the functions individually:

<example>
# Import specific functions from a library
from math import sqrt, sin
# Then we can use the function directly
sqrt(16)
sin(0)
</example>

Or import everything from the library:

<example>
# Import everything from the library
from math import *
# Then we can all functions directly, such as sqrt() and sin()
sqrt(16)
cos(0)
tan(0)
sin(0)
</example>

Phew that’s a lot of ways to import libraries! You’ll mostly see the
=import ... as ...= syntax, and sometimes the =from ... import ...=
syntax.

Note that we typically import all required libraries at the top of the
file, in a single code chunk. This is a good practice to follow.

<quote>
**Practice**

*** Q: Definitions

Come up with simple definitions for the following terms that are clear
to YOU (even if not technically exactly accurate):

 - Library (Module)
 - Import
 - Alias
</quote>

<quote>
**Practice**

*** Q: Using functions from imported libraries

 - Import the =random= library and use the =randint()= function to
   generate a random integer between 1 and 10. You can use the =?=
   operator to get help on the function after importing it.

<example>
# Your code here
</example>
</quote>

** Installing Libraries

While Python comes with many built-in libraries, there are thousands of
additional libraries available that you can install to extend Python’s
functionality even further. Let’s look at how to install and use a
simple external library, with the =cowsay= library as an example.

If we try to import this library without first installing it, we get an
error:

<example>
import cowsay
</example>

To install the library, you can use the =!pip install= command in a code
cell in Google Colab. For =cowsay=, you would run:

<example>
!pip install cowsay
</example>

Pip installs packages from a remote repository called
[[https://pypi.org/][PyPI]]. Anyone can create and upload a package to
PyPI. After a few checks, it’s then available for anyone to install.

<quote>
**Side-note**

For those working on local Python instances, you can install =cowsay=
using pip in your terminal:

<example>
pip install cowsay
</example>
</quote>

Once installed, we can now import and use the =cowsay= library:

<example>
import cowsay

# Make the cow say something
cowsay.cow('Moo!')
</example>

This should display an ASCII art cow saying “Moo!”.

<quote>
**Practice**

*** Q: Using the emoji library

 1. Install the =emoji= library.
 2. Import the =emoji= library.
 3. Consult the help for the =emojize()= function in the =emoji=
    library.
 4. Use the =emojize()= function to display an emoji for “thumbs up”.

<example>
# Your code here
</example>
</quote>

** Wrap-up

In this lesson, we’ve covered:

 1. Functions and methods in Python
 2. Arguments (parameters) and how to use them
 3. Importing and using libraries
 4. Installing and using an external library

These concepts are fundamental to Python programming and will be used
extensively as you continue to develop your skills. Practice using
different functions, methods, and libraries to become more comfortable
with these concepts.
